Norbert Preining
Fujitsu Research

Gödel Logics - a short survey


Gödel logics can be characterized in a rough-and-ready way as follows: 
The language is a standard (propositional, quantified-propositional, 
first-order) language.  The logics are many-valued, and the
sets of truth values considered are (closed) subsets of [0,1] which
contain both 0 and 1. 1 is the `designated value,' i.e., a
formula is valid if it receives the value 1 in every interpretation.
The truth functions of conjunction and disjunction are minimum and
maximum, respectively, and in the first-order case quantifiers are
defined by infimum and supremum over subsets of the set of truth
values.  The characteristic operator of Gödel logics, the Gödel
conditional, is defined by A->B = 1 if A <= B, and B otherwise.
Because the truth values are ordered, the semantics of Gödel logics is 
suitable for formalizing comparisons. It is related in this respect to a
more widely known many-valued logic, Lukasiewicz (or `fuzzy') logic.
In contrast to Lukasiewicz logic, which might be considered a logic of
"absolute" or "metric comparison", Gödel logics are logics
of "relative comparison".  

Approaching from a different angle, Gödel logic is one of the three basic
t-norm based logics which have received increasing attention in the
last 15 or so years (the others are Lukasiewicz and product logic).
Yet Gödel logic is also closely related to intuitionistic logic: 
it is the logic of linearly-ordered Heyting algebras.  
In the propositional case, infinite-valued Gödel logic can
be axiomatized by the intuitionistic propositional calculus extended
by the axiom schema (A -> B) V (B -> A).  This connection
extends also to Kripke semantics for intuitionistic logic: Gödel
logics can also be characterized as logics of (classes of) linearly
ordered and countable intuitionistic Kripke structures with constant
domains. Furthermore, the infinitely valued propositional Gödel logic 
can be embedded into the box fragment of LTL in the same way as
intuitionistic propositional logic can be embedded into S4.

We will give a short overview of this family, presenting propositional,
quantified propositional (weak second order), and first order logics,
including proof-theory, relation to intuitionistic logic, and recent
results on fragments.

